[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of
neon.pdf fish a team working on nomic
which is a layer one blockchain that
offers a decentralized non-custodial
Bitcoin Bridge into the cosmos
ecosystem topics of discussion in this
episode included the ethos of
peer-to-peer
building bitcoin's resiliency through
slower development
Cycles the power teams have in building
Stacks in the cosmos
ecosystem unlocking bitcoin's liquidity
into cross chain defy and so much
more just a reminder nothing said on
this podcast is a solicitation to buy or
sell any tokens and that nothing should
be taken as Financial advice the host or
guests May hold tokens discussed in this
episode so check out the Neo news today
web page for more information on
disclaimers with all that said I really
enjoyed having this conversation with
Matt and I hope you enjoy it too hey
everyone welcome to the smart economy
podcast I am really excited today to be
joined with Matt Bell the CEO and
co-founder of Turbo fish turbo fish is a
team working on nomic a layer one
blockchain which offers a decentralized
non-custodial Bitcoin Bridge into the
cosmos ecosystem how you doing today
Matt pretty good how are you doing I'm
doing awesome um I actually just got
back from a few days in DC to Advocate
on the hill for broader crypto
legislation so I'm really rear up and
ready to jump into these conversations
and really excited to actually talk to
you um about nomic because um full
disclosure I've been a nom coddler and
user for the past couple years and it's
been really cool to kind of see um the
progress that the team has made so to
jump into the conversation today I just
kind of want to start at a higher level
more philosophical question and hear
your insights about why it's so
important to connect the Bitcoin Network
with other emerging blockchain
ecosystems like
Cosmos yeah that's a really good
question because to me it's really
obvious that you Bitcoin is the crypto
asset you know like it's the digital
gold and you know sometimes you know
ethereum has risen up and it's like
within the ethereum ecosystem eth is you
know its own digital gold but if we zoom
out and look at the broader crypto
ecosystem Bitcoin is more valuable than
all other cryptocurrencies combined you
know that just so much value and if we
look at it most of that's just sitting
in wallets it's like so many people have
BTC but they're not doing anything with
it and so it's this important asset but
it doesn't really have Finance where you
can use that Bitcoin and productively
earn yield or borrow against it like if
you want to do any of those things you
have to do it on a centralized platform
so we have this important crypto asset
but sort of no venue to really put it to
work and use it in a decentralized way
so I I think it's really important to
bring Bitcoin to you know any crypto
defi platform or ecosystem and put it to
work so that's what we're trying to
accomplish and uh that's why we think
what nomic is doing is so valuable yeah
I agree and I can't wait to to dig into
this more uh but I kind of want to take
a step back and get a little bit of a
sense of your history and how you ended
up in this place um so do you recall the
first time you came across Bitcoin ether
blockchain crypto um yeah just the first
time you heard about any of this web 3
stuff and what were kind of your initial
insights yeah so I think I kind of have
a funny unique crypto origin story how I
first got into it because it was 201
that was before eth was created that was
before so many things it was sort of
just Bitcoin and it was it was just this
little niche community of like people
online um so how I first found it was I
was just always really interested in
peer-to-peer networks cuz you know sort
of growing up through the peer-to-peer
file sharing era where there were like
you know everyone was just like
downloading music and doing that sort of
stuff I was just thought it was kind of
fascinating technology because it's
really native to the Internet it's not
like some website that can be shut down
it's basically just a bunch of people
sharing files with each other and uh I
don't know I just always wanted to learn
more about that so I remember like
reading about peer-to-peer networks on
Wikipedia and that was where I first saw
Bitcoin mentioned where it was like you
know another application of peer-to-peer
networks is you could create money by
doing this and I just thought okay that
kind of makes sense you know that's just
another application of peer-to-peer
technology and uh it wasn't like I saw
it as like this is something I have to
invest in I really thought it was just
some Niche little project that no one
would ever care about but I thought it
was so cool and like I would read so
much about it and like I joined all
these communities and i' be talking to
people about it and playing around with
it and uh like me and Jud who is my
co-founder here at turbo fish you know
uh by the way turbo fish we're the
company we're the core contributors to
nomic uh that's sort of just our
development company but Jud who's my
co-founder there like early on we like
uh we pulled together money to buy a
Bitcoin miner back when you could do it
just with gpus before it had to be like
a big commercial operation and we're
mining on my college dorm electricity
for free and so you know we were just
both into Bitcoin we thought it was so
interesting and uh you know like now
it's been I've been working in the
crypto industry ever since then uh so it
just sort of started out as a hobby of
an interest in peer-to-peer networks and
it just sort of stuck so since then I've
worked at different crypto companies uh
like I was at protocol Labs which is the
company that makes ipfs and file coins
so I still have a lot of commits on the
go b or sorry the go ipfs implementation
like spent a few years working on that
and then eventually moved over to Cosmos
really early on and uh you know I've
just been in the industry engineering
and interested in all the different
evolutions of it ever since yeah that's
awesome you touched on a lot of key
points that I can't wait to bring up
throughout this discussion um but I love
hearing that it's the P2P Revolution
that kind of got you stoked on the space
I've very much remember my first time
downloading one of these uh audio files
from a peer-to-peer Network and the
feeling of empowerment that they gave me
that I now had access to all this audio
content in the world that um I was even
younger at the time so maybe explicit
albums that my parents didn't want me
listening to being able to have access
to that was one of a more one of the
more freeing moments I've ever felt in
my life and Bitcoin is definitely that
but for money so that's super cool that
you kind of got into it from a a first
principles Builder kind of perspective
and and just kind of leaning into what
these P2P networks were so you said that
you got your start at protocol Labs uh
and we're also proud to have some
protocol Labs alumni on the Pod um Sarah
theam from who's working on ipfs as well
so what did you study in school and how
did did that that kind of help uh
further this interest that you had in
building in these open- Source
peer-to-peer networks yeah so I was
studying computer science and it's funny
because you know I didn't stay in school
that long I dropped out because you know
my fascination with Bitcoin and like
joining all these different Bitcoin
communities I was like getting all these
jobs like getting paid to work on
bitcoin stuff back when there you know
there weren't very many developers in
that space so uh you know they were sort
of the first emerging companies and uh
you know it was just this small circle
it was sort of easy to find work there
and I was just I was like hm I'm already
fully employed so do I need to do
another three years of school and so I
just dropped out and you know made it my
career so yeah and when you dropped out
you went over to protocol Labs first no
that was a few years later that's funny
because that I was working on my own
project called filecoin and so the
founder actually reached out to buy the
domain name I owned filecoin org and he
reached out and then like then we just
started talking and he's just like hm
like you want to come to San Francisco
and like you know start hacking on some
stuff with us and yeah then that's how
that happened uh but the first thing I
worked on in crypto was it was this
really early Bitcoin multisig wallet
that was before the word multisig was
even a term it was just sort of it
wasn't even officially supported in
Bitcoin yet I think the multisig op code
hadn't even landed in Bitcoin yet and so
they were like using some special
cryptography to even make that possible
but uh yeah it was just like that
company is gone now but it just sort of
stuck for me that uh you know this is a
fascinating space with so much going on
that you know I just knew I wanted to
work in this space yeah that's that's
really awesome and so you had this
company that you started that doesn't
exist anymore you were kind of ahead of
the Curve
um like using filecoin and and looking
at these multisig Solutions or trying to
Envision multisig
Solutions um so between then and and
maybe around the time that you're at
protocol Labs or a little bit after you
also uh had some other companies that
you founded or worked on behalf of
mercury and all-in bits so maybe you can
kind of you don't necessarily have to go
into what the details of what those were
but maybe how did your experience um
during prot collabs and afterwards how
did that kind of lead create the path
that led you to co-founding Turbo fish
yeah so that was I feel like for some
context I've like when I first got into
all of this since it was only Bitcoin
sort of the default position for
everyone was to be a Bitcoin Maxi where
it was sort of there was Bitcoin and
there were like these little sort of
experimental projects that no one took
seriously and then ethereum was the
first time where it was like okay okay
maybe one of these alt projects is a big
thing and maybe there's some people who
haven't accepted that still but you know
at the time I really hadn't and I didn't
really see the value in things that
weren't Bitcoin but I was interested in
proof of stake I was thinking like I
don't know if this can work or not
because you know bitcoin's proof of work
is so fundamentally sound and elegant
and do we really want to just replace it
with some other system can that even
work why wouldn't we have started with
proof of AK in the first place if it can
work and so I just had all these
questions about that but then yeah all
in bits tenderman Cosmos you know it's
all the same thing you know they had
different names for the organization but
uh like I saw they were hiring and I was
like okay I just want to learn more
about this proof of stake thing I don't
know if it can work but I can at least
you know start working there and see
what I think and uh yeah eventually you
know like while digging into the tech it
was like okay it really is figured out
now and I I think it makes a lot of
sense but you know uh I I think there's
an important thing to think about in
proof of work versus proof of Stak you
know like Bitcoin and Mining versus you
know ethereum type chains with staking
uh they're actually it's not like a
replacement not proof of stake I don't
believe should replace proof of work I
think they're perfectly complimentary
and they work together very well in a
technical sense and uh I just think
that's really cool from like a a meme
perspective
like Texas is the land of Bitcoin Maxis
so when you're going to like Bitcoin
meetups and you're talking about working
on nomic and bridging Bitcoin to the
cosmos ecosystem are you running into
folks who shun you or or call you like a
coiner or something like that
what's kind of the perspective of folks
that you build around in in Austin and
are they open to the ideas of bridging
Bitcoin to other non proof of work non
Bitcoin ecosystems that's a really good
question yeah that's like it's a touchy
thing for some people like uh I think
the way we look at it is since Bitcoin
is so big there's such a diverse set of
people who hold Bitcoin it's really a
spectrum and so we have this extreme
loud part of the spectrum where it's
like Bitcoin only there should be no
other crypto asset and I think you know
that's a very extreme position it
doesn't really make sense because you
know like if you have a currency you
would want like companies that use that
currency to exist in that ecosystem and
you know you might want shares of those
companies and that's a different asset
we don't have to look at that as
competing with the currency itself like
if you're holding some company stock
does that mean like the currency is
worse off for it I don't think so and so
I think there are still a lot of those
extreme people but increasingly and
especially with all the activity in
ordinals and all these new things in the
Bitcoin ecosystem there's an increasing
amount of progressive bitcoiners where
you know they still want Bitcoin to win
they want Bitcoin to be the crypto asset
but you know they're okay with projects
that use Bitcoin that also you know sort
of have other tokens and nfts and things
like that and so yeah I think
increasingly projects like nomic are
becoming sort of canonically part of
like the main Bitcoin culture it's
becoming more acceptable you know and uh
yeah so I think if you'd asked me a few
years ago it would have been like oh I'm
kind of you know I I keep it under wraps
like I don't talk to people about this
sort of thing because I'm worried what
they might think but I think in the last
year that's evolved a ton and uh I I'm
really bullish on the Bitcoin ecosystem
in general because you know people have
realized like if we're just this extreme
and we don't touch anything other than
Bitcoin then we're not going to make
very many cool things that people really
want and uh yeah so I think it's a
really exciting time for all of that
yeah I agree I mean I was kind of having
some moments of fear I guess you could
say over the past year and a half or so
before ordinals and really concerned
about how Bitcoin security is going to
move forward in the future if miners
aren't able to derive more of a revenue
um and so I was actually having some
serious existential questions not to
like throw salt in the wound of Bitcoin
Maxis or anything like that but really
curious to see like how will miners be
rewarded in the future especially as
Bitcoin emissions are reducing where you
know the happing another happening is
upon us soon so it's really cool to kind
of see what ordinals have done and um
also kind of cool to hear that there are
folks who were I guess you could say
quote unquote Maxis who are starting to
come around and this is why I really
appreciate what nomic is doing and you
kind of have been propagating this
narrative um and the media that I've
seen you partake in written and and
spoken interviews where Bitcoin has 500
billion doar of liquidity it's the OG
digital asset OG decentralized digital
asset and you're right most people just
hdle it and throw it into a wallet and
don't look at it anymore but these
digital assets have programmability
built into them and we should be able to
leverage them in other ways that we want
to whether it's to borrow or lend or to
do other defi activities so can you kind
of just from a high level or just from
your perspective maybe you're even
reiterating something you've already
said but could you just share some
insights into bitcoin's uh massive
amount of untapped liquidity and why
it's such an issue um to the point where
maybe this liquidity should be tapped
into to provide broader uh defi
opportunities yeah so I think there's a
ton so I think for any asset you know
there's sort of these core Financial use
cases that people are going to want so
if you hold a lot of Bitcoin uh it makes
a lot of sense to be able to borrow
against that Bitcoin where you use it as
collateral and then you get some other
asset in return so that could be some
dollar stable coin or something like
that so let's say you have a million
dollars worth of bitcoin and you don't
want to sell it but you need some
dollars to keep operating your business
so you can instead borrow you know say
$500,000 worth of stable coin like USD
stable coin and you use that and so you
still have that million dollars worth of
bitcoin as collateral but then you've
borrowed against it and so Bitcoin is
like really still like your fundamental
underlying asset and if the price of
Bitcoin keeps going up you still capture
the value of that but you know it's not
just value in your portfolio that's
locked and you can't do anything with it
you're actually like usefully using that
value in any way that you want and so
you know that's that's just one core
thing is borrowing and lending and so uh
I think that's one of the first most
important use cases uh but you know uh
there's so many other things and that's
so in the ethereum ecosystem we see a
lot of that with things like wbtc I
think wrapped Bitcoin is really
interesting because it validates that uh
you know Bitcoin as an asset is so
important for any defi ecosystem so if
you look at the tvl of ethereum it's
something like $20 billion last time I
checked I don't know a lot of been has
been moving in the last few weeks so
that number could be off by some amount
now but if you look at wrapped Bitcoin
that's worth5
billion uh and that's that's pretty
interesting to me because that means
even though that's not a native asset so
for context wbtc is centrally held like
there's one custodian which is that
company bitgo that holds all the Bitcoin
and so anyone holding wbtc is
essentially trusting that they're going
to like you know really keep all the
Bitcoin and honor uh redemptions and
things like that and so it's really not
a native way to use Bitcoin but since
Bitcoin is such an important asset
people will still take on that risk and
use it and I to me that just validates
that people want to use Bitcoin in Defi
and just imagine if there was a native
way to use that Bitcoin I think there
would be far more Bitcoin in any defi
ecosystem but um the fact that wbtc is
such a major asset of ethereum is pretty
cool and it shows that you know people
want Bitcoin as
collateral yeah I think you touched on a
really important point and I was
planning on touching on this later but
this is the perfect opportunity to do so
you mentioned that wrapped Bitcoin is
managed by a centralized entity a
custodial service and something that NCH
is doing that's really really cool is
building a non-custodial Bridge so you
know when people think of bridging they
might think of like the Wormhole hack or
you name any other hack that's happened
in the eth ecosystem transferring in and
out of there so how does nomic apply uh
this non-custodial principle to bridging
yeah so it just starts with the
technical design of nomic so we've done
so much where it's really deeply
integrated with how Bitcoin works
because it's so focused on bitcoin like
if you look at other bridging projects
they sort of try to connect every
blockchain to every other blockchain and
so they can't really take the time to go
deep into one and Bitcoin is so
different from all the sort of newer
blockchains that you can't really just
apply the same strategies there you
really have to go deep into how the
Bitcoin protocol works and so how nomic
does that for instance we have this
emergency dispersal process uh like
that's just one really cool feature
where if nomic went down for any reason
like even if it was like the worst
possible case and the network is just
gone in other bridging protocols your
Bitcoin would just be stuck in limbo but
in nomic the Bitcoin comes back to you
on the Bitcoin blockchain automatically
so it would just show up back in your
Bitcoin wallet and you know I think that
sort of thing is really cool and that's
you know that's not something that other
bridging protocols have and it's
something that you know it makes it
really your Bitcoin so if you're holding
Bitcoin in the bridge so you you can
deposit Bitcoin and then you have nbtc
and that you can use that in different
Cosmos blockchains uh but if something
goes down you essentially get that
Bitcoin back automatically and that even
goes further to make it so that uh you
only have to trust that 10% of the
voting power is honest which is a very
small assumption like it's very easy to
assume that you know like comparing that
to things like Bitcoin you have to
assume that over 50% is honest or in
tender based blockchains and Cosmos you
have to assume that 2/3 is honest uh
with nomic you know it has this like
very small threshold uh so it's like a
very high guarantee that things will
keep working as expected and so like I
can list off a bunch of different
technical details like that but just
overall the picture I'm trying to paint
is we've gone really deep into making it
you know it's it's the polar opposite of
wbtc where you just there's this one
entity and you just have to hope that
they're operating as expected instead
everything's very open and transparent
and the mechanisms are designed to be
you know very likely to keep working as
expected yeah that's really cool um
maybe from like uh a Layman's
perspective uh when somebody sees nbtc
and wbtc to them it might just look or
sound the same you know there's a letter
before Bitcoin or the BTC asset so now
from my perspective
it might just seem wrapped anyways so
could you just kind of like help me Gro
that like why isn't nbtc just like
another wrapped asset that's now
composable in the cosmos ecosystem so
yeah it's just if you look at the
underlying mechanisms uh it's sort of
like saying a balance on coinbase versus
a balance on metamask or something like
that where uh I mean this isn't the way
we do it but imagine if if you deposit
Bitcoin into coinbase and you call that
like coinbase Bitcoin uh that's
essentially the difference where like
you know that there's some custodian
holding it so in that case that's wbtc
is bitco bitgo holding it but in nik's
case it's this decentralized custody
process and uh you know we do call it
nbtc but that has been something we've
talked about and that's something
osmosis which is the main decks in cosm
they they really want it to be uh you
know sort of pick a canonical Bitcoin
representation so they do still have
wbtc there but uh they want one where
like once it's over the threshold of the
security you would expect uh to just be
able to call it Bitcoin and not have to
you know add this sort of qualifier
letter and so I imagine you know it'll
be a osmosis governance proposal or
something like that but I really believe
IC can be that and just be Bitcoin
within Cosmos rather than nbtc but for
now just to keep things simple it's just
nbtc cool I appreciate that so one of
the things that um I was always uh I
guess you could say a fan of or just
something I appreciated was much like
bitcoin's slow glacial pace of
development is a feature not a bug nomic
um for me personally famously just took
a a while to release uh this bridge on
mainnet so from my perspective that just
shows that there are these same
principles to bitcoin core development
that you and your team might have
applied so I guess maybe using the
lessons of previous hype and bust cycles
and bitcoin's pace of development um
what are some of the I guess
correlations to nomix development pace
and bitcoin's development Pace that uh
you applied to building this
non-custodial bridge and maybe you could
share some insights into why uh you and
your team really focused on churning out
a solid product rather than churning out
something during like a crazy bull
market uh type of cycle yeah I like that
question a lot I think if you look at
any sort of development even more than
just crypto even more than just software
you can look at it as if you're building
for the shortterm or the long term so
you can imagine so many home builders in
the United States you know just like
cranking out these houses where they
just put it together so cheaply and
maybe cut a bunch of corners but they
can turn something around really quickly
where they have this house and someone
can buy it and maybe it won't last that
long you know it's like measured in
decades where a few decades later you
know it needs repairs and a bunch of
things need to be replaced we could
compare that to something like building
a cathedral or a castle where the amount
of manh hours that would take is so much
higher but what they're building is
something far greater and will last you
know potentially thousands of years and
uh I think Bitcoin sort of has this
ethos of building for the very long term
like being the asset that lasts
thousands of years that like will be
important to the economy of the world a
thousand years from now and I really
believe it can be and I think so many
other things in crypto are just focused
on yeah the next few years of the bull
market and just being able to make their
token price go up so that the founders
get rich and so you know I'd rather
build to make a lasting Legacy of this
project that lasts a long time and is
useful to people for a very long time
and uh you know there's so much room in
between in that Spectrum like you don't
have to be as Extreme as Bitcoin and but
like if you take a few years to build
something and the grand scheme of things
that's not that long and uh you know in
software we're just spoiled by you know
you can execute projects in a few months
if you really want to but I believe you
know that takes a lot of cutting Corners
if you're trying to build something
really great so uh in the case of
bridging you know there's so many Bridge
projects that it's really easy for them
to add new chains because essentially
all it is is a small multi- and so any
chain that supports that they can just
quickly add it uh and they don't even
you know they'll they sort of put a lot
of trust in their validators to report
on what's happening on the remote chains
but in nik's case it has a Bitcoin
client within the protocol so it's
actually verifying all the proof of work
that was mined on bitcoin it's verifying
proofs of what happens on the Bitcoin
chain so I think that's pretty unique
for bridge but it's just sort of the
difference between you know doing the
quick easy way and like the solid
long-term way and uh so it's not just
that there's that of building for the
future but there's also uh like with
turbo fish everything we've built for
nomic is like first of all we're a small
team you know we're just three Engineers
working on all of this and we're not
just like uh other Cosmos chains that
build on the cosmos SDK but we've
actually built our own stack from the
ground up so we've essentially rebuilt
an alternative to the cosmos SDK that's
more performant and you can get things
done with like a tenth of the code you
can build comparable pieces with yeah
one tenth of the lines of code and so
that itself has been a big investment so
in working on nomic it's like we didn't
just build nomic we built this whole
stack from the ground up and then we
built nomic on it and uh so that really
is just an investment for the future of
everything else we'll want to build
after nomic or changes to nomic that
we'd want to propose and uh I think you
know that in the end makes noic a better
product and uh makes its future brighter
for all the new upcoming things that
we'll be able to accomplish and uh I
think you know it's in a place now where
for the team like we can really execute
things really well in a short amount of
time it just took that initial
investment of building the tools to get
there so I think from here on out you
know things won't be necessarily this
slow pace but like on a product level
you know each month or two we'll be able
to prep propos cool new things to the
protocol yeah that's really cool I love
the analogy that you use with Cathedrals
as well um I read a novel a couple years
ago that just one one of the main
characters was um a cathedral Builder
and he knew he was going to spend his
whole life working on building this uh
phenomenal fantastic building and he was
never going to see it finished it was
going to be a multi-generational process
to build it so I love that metaphor I
think it's really apt especially in such
a fast moving industry and ecosystem
such as not only Tech but crypto and
blockchain in general um so I'm actually
curious to hear then because it sounds
like you rebuilt the cosmos SDK stack to
fit no mix needs so you guys were really
on the ground level with that but what
about like bitcoin's upgrades how does
something like um the addition of tap
rot or multisig snore signatures how do
you guys go about keeping your finger on
the pulse for Bitcoin development and
maybe even Cosmos development and how
that might impact what you're working on
with nomic because now you're very
dependent on major upgrades that happen
in both ecosystems so what's it like
just balancing having to basically be
like a subject matter expert on two
development ecosystems yeah I mean it's
very fun to keep up to date with what's
happening in Bitcoin and all the
evolutions because you know like you've
said it is a glacial pace of development
so it's honestly not that hard to keep
up with but uh it's very it also makes
it more exciting because like any minor
change in the protocol like makes all
these new possibilities uh and uh yeah
so specifically for tap rot like you
asked about that is something we're
incorporating uh in you know one of the
next nomic proposals and uh it's
essentially you know we'll be able to
make things so much more efficient where
uh as funds move in the bridge in
instead of the scripts being you know
all these different signatures like all
this different data that has to go to
the Bitcoin blockchain it all turns into
like one simple little signature so it's
just yeah that's from like the schnor
signature cryptography essentially it
just makes noic a 100 times more
efficient or something like that or up
to a thousand times even and uh like I
think that's really cool that that's a
new part of the Bitcoin protocol but
even going beyond that I think there's
some really part really exciting parts
to be excited about like uh there's
opcat which is it's it's just this very
simple change to the Bitcoin protocol
it's something that even Satoshi had
originally put in the Bitcoin protocol
but then he had realized like oh maybe
this needs a little more thought because
people can use this to spam the network
so he turned it off but like since then
they've figured out like ways to make
sure no one can use it to spam the
network and uh so turning that back on
it sounds like you know just such a
minor difference but like people have
shown you can really build anything with
that like all these amazing smart
contracts things that were only possible
on ethereum just with this one little
change to the Bitcoin protocol you'll be
able to do like construct all these
different contracts it'll be natively
enforced by the Bitcoin protocol and I
think that's really cool so keeping up
to date with that like you know if that
goes through and it's looking likely
because there's been those issues with
the lightning network uh and like
there's something called rep placement
attacks which has sort of you know made
these issues with the lightning Network
this would be able to fix all of that
and so it makes it sort of likely that
in the next year or two I could see you
know the Bitcoin core devs and the
Bitcoin ecosystem at large you know
getting excited about re-enabling opcat
and then as a byproduct making all these
really cool Bitcoin native smart
contracts possible and that was that
would definitely be something that nomic
would make use of in a big way that's
cool it has nomic done any Bitcoin
development that has maybe um raised the
attention to bitcoin developers core
developers have I guess what I mean to
say is have you guys um built something
that has kind of raised the eyebrows of
of Bitcoin devs and maybe something that
nomic has done has acted as an
opportunity for Bitcoin developers to
kind of add something new that they
never thought of before yeah definitely
I think uh like when we very first
published it's not a white paper but
it's just this sort of technical design
document about how nomic works like we
had just posted that online you know
sort of while we were in the early days
of implementing it and that was you know
yeah about two years ago and uh I just
you know posted that online and then we
happened to go to the Austin bit dev's
Meetup for the first time because
someone had told us about it and the
format of that is they just sort of uh
the presenters sort of like go through
all the cool things happening in Bitcoin
like they have like a big list of like
things to share and then they bring it
up for discussion and it was our first
time going to that we didn't know anyone
there and then that happened to be one
of the things they brought up and so
that was just so cool to see uh and yeah
like from there on out you know there's
been so many cool people like really
smart people in the Bitcoin world that
are really native Bitcoin developers
that have engaged with this and uh you
know know it's it's very fun to work
with Bitcoin because it's uh I don't
know it's just such a different type of
development than other places like it is
a little esoteric like you do have to
know a lot about Bitcoin specifically to
be able to get anything done but then uh
because of that you know maybe there are
less things to look at than say ethereum
where you know there's so many projects
built on ethereum it'd be impossible to
know about all of them but in Bitcoin
when someone makes something cool since
that doesn't happen as often then people
will talk about it more and so it is
very fun to engage in that and it is
very fun to build on bitcoin because you
know it is kind of harder I think yeah
that's cool and and it and it really
does seem like your team is is genuinely
excited when you guys come across a new
user especially if they you found them
in the wild that's that's got to be an
awesome feeling and I feel like you guys
probably get to feel that uh more often
than not um so I'm guess I'm curious to
hear uh like what
maybe this is a simple answer because
you worked uh in the cosmos ecosystem
you were at tendermint before and you've
been collaborating alongside Cosmos
folks for so many years but what was it
about Cosmos in general that attracted
you there as opposed to any other L1
ecosystem that was kind of beginning to
emerge in the 17 18 19 era yeah I like
that question uh what I would say is
Cosmos is essentially you know it's not
this monolithic thing it's not like this
platform where you just add your smart
contract and it lives on the platform
it's instead really just tools for you
to build your own blockchain and so you
get to make all your own engineering
decisions or you know economic decisions
of how your protocol Works instead of
being you know beholden to how those
platform developers have decided things
work on their chain that you submit to
it's now you build your chain and you
get to make the decisions and so so when
I've talked about we built our stack
from the ground up you wouldn't be able
to do that anywhere else like uh we use
the tender consensus protocol like all
Cosmos chains but we don't use the
cosmos SDK we use our stack called Orga
and uh but they still get to be
compatible you know like you can still
transfer tokens even though we have this
from scratch implementation it still
works with all other Cosmos chains and I
think that's really cool that's
something you really can't do anywhere
else yeah you you mentioned
uh you guys are also working on on MC so
can you share a little bit uh a little
bit more highlights on uh maybe what Mk
is and then also touch on why you guys
are such rust Maxis yeah okay so to give
some context we started out uh you know
coming from the cosmos world we first
built like yeah my co-founder Jud
started this project called lotion JS
which is it's a JavaScript framework for
making Cosmos chains and so that you
know so many people were really excited
about that and like while we were
working on that that was you know there
were a lot of people building projects
there because it's so easy to get
started and so we've always valued you
know making these Frameworks where it's
very easy to use uh like for new
developers to get in and just even for
expert developers to get things done in
like without having to like you know
like to build things more simply uh even
if you're building something Advanced
you know it it really really uh yeah so
just ease of use is something we've
always valued and so we had started
building that and then eventually the
Merkel tree which is an important
component of any of these systems that's
essentially the database of the
blockchain and so anything you're doing
has to go through that so if that's slow
then everything's going to be slow so we
were like let's rebuild the Merkel Tree
in Rust so that it's fast and so we had
this JavaScript platform with a rust
Merkel tree and then that went so well
and it was you know it made it so much
more solid and so much faster it was
like you know what let's build the whole
thing in Rust and so that was sort of
our journey into rust and uh Orga is
sort of the spiritual successor to
lotion but you know all in Rust and uh
but still keeping a lot of those values
of making things easy to use and so rust
is like a harder language to use than
JavaScript but that doesn't mean uh you
have to lose that ease of use and so uh
We've made it really important to be
able to get a lot done with a very small
amount of code and that also goes in
line with our team being very lean you
know instead of I think it's very common
for so many crypto companies in general
like if they want to build something you
know they have so many Engineers like
you know if it takes 30 Engineers to
build something then the product isn't
going to be as good it takes it's going
to be 30 times more complex then and uh
with Orga you know it's sort of designed
for a small amount of people to get a
lot done and uh yeah so Merc just
touching on that more since we built
that in Rust we focus really hard on
performance and uh comparing that to the
cosmos SDK it's you know something like
10 or 20 times faster than the cosmos
sdk's Merkel tree and so that just makes
for you can build blockchains that have
much more throughput so we value things
like salana a lot protocols that have
focused on performance and uh yeah so at
Turbo fish you know we've made
everything we've built very high
performance like that which is another
way to build for the future and be able
to support large amounts of users for
anything we build and uh yeah I'm very
proud of how high performance and how
solidly engineered some of these things
we've built are that's yeah that's
really cool to hear so you mentioned um
another alt L1 that is building along
the principles that you guys value so is
that kind of maybe an Easter egg or a
hint for uh other networks you guys
might plan on bridging into or out of in
the future or are you really still kind
of just doubling down on the cosmos
ecosystem that wasn't meant to be an a
Easter egg but we do view nomic as going
Beyond just Cosmos uh you know Cosmos is
a really cool ecosystem but like the
mission we're trying to accomplish is
really just having defi native to
bitcoin and uh I think you know a lot of
that does mean bridging to other
ecosystems as well like it would be
really cool uh something on our road map
is bringing Bitcoin to ethereum so
bringing nbtc to ethereum through nomic
and uh yeah and also just like native
smart contracts on bitcoin and uh yeah
cool well I don't think I was trying to
to draw out like a what's next but
that's really interesting to hear that
the road mapap eventually or just the
expands Beyond just one blockchain
ecosystem um but I am curious to to hear
maybe for other Bridge Builders out
there who are hearing this and they
maybe want to pull some uh insights
gleaned from you what might be one of
the biggest piece of advice or the
biggest takeaways that you've had for
other Bridge builders in the experience
that you've had with nomic what might be
one thing
that if you and your team could say this
is something that you guys should focus
on other Bridge Builders should focus on
what might that be yeah I'd say don't
cut Corners like really build all these
mechanisms to be as solid as possible
and uh also it's very valuable like
we're really lucky that we get to make
use of all the bridges of the past that
have sort of failed or had incidents and
those are sort of the guinea pigs where
we can look at what kinds of accidents
have happened and I think that's true of
any technology that you know it might
start out and there are these accidents
like when people first started using
electricity you know they didn't have
all the safety precautions that they
have today and so uh you know there were
accidents and that scared a lot of
people off they tried to like say that
like AC power is bad and uh I think
Bridges have sort of gone through the
same thing where some people are like
you know never use Bridges because
they're unsafe and that's just because
the very early ones you know they didn't
know what to watch out for and uh just
looking at everything that's happened in
the past you can like there are simple
ways to learn from that and incorporate
security features into the protocol and
so you know another one in nomic I can
mention is that it has a circuit breaker
mechanism so if there was some issue and
all the funds were leaving the bridge at
once the protocol would automatically
put a halt on that and sort of let the
community take time to figure out what's
going on and respond accordingly and I
think you know that'll just be a
mechanism that's in every bridge going
into the future because pretty much any
of the incidents and bridges that have
happened in the past they would have
just you know been fine if they had that
simple mechanism but they just hadn't
thought about that yet and uh so yeah I
think that's a very big lesson is just
look at what's happened in the past and
adapt based on that cool you mentioned
that like should there be an event where
there's a malicious actor trying to
drain all the Bitcoin that's been
bridged over via nomic um so right now I
would assume that the nomic leadership
is probably in charge of a lot of these
types of decisions and um centralization
and decentralization is a spectrum so as
you guys kind of continue to grow and
build out the pro protocol maybe you
also relinquish some of the control the
reign of the control that you and your
team have over the ecosystem so can you
share more about nomic plan to
decentralize and um maybe what's a dow
model might look like for nomic and
maybe even the types of decisions that
might be put to a DA yeah so I mean in
nomic like we turbo fish as developers
contributing to nomic we don't have any
special Authority you know we don't have
there's no like admin switches we don't
have like our keys encoded in the
protocol in some way where we we control
things or anything like that we're
really just a team proposing changes to
the protocol and it's up to the network
to accept them and the ecosystem is
already on its way uh expanding and
getting more contributors and that's a
really cool thing to see and uh yeah
there's no there's really no dependence
on turbo fish itself as you were saying
like the nomic nomic leadership being in
charge of those things uh like it is
lacking somewhat more of like explicit
Dow mechanisms uh but in general the
power that controls things already is
the voting power distributed across the
validator so it's sort of the set of
validators making some decisions but
overall the set of token holders non
token holders deciding who they've
staked to and uh yeah you know
decentralization is something we really
value because you know coming from the
Bitcoin ethos obviously that's something
that like bitcoiners really care about
too and uh yeah I think there's that's
another way where I think so many recent
blockchains have cut Corners because you
know they might not value
decentralization as much but in nomic
it's really this like fair and open
protocol where there are no leaders uh
so maybe we're thought leaders in a way
just because uh you know we've put so
much work into the design of how the
protocol works but over time uh you know
just like Bitcoin I I do believe it's
something opening up where you know it
can be proposed by the first person who
built it but then it's just in the
community's hands to keep maintaining it
that's an interesting um so like
something that I thought was uh kind of
an interesting moment for the cosmos
ecosystem particularly in the past month
was uh this kind of contentious vote in
prop 848 which would deal with the
inflation rates for Adam um stakers and
and how much Adam they would re receive
for staking so I'm curious to hear how
uh you guys view um the opportunities or
constraints that maybe contentious votes
might have on behalf of the blockchain
networks that you guys integrate with um
and which is right now Bitcoin and
Cosmos so how does kind of the voting
and governance mechanisms of the
different blockchains you're on impact
the way that you guys develop nomic so
Nomi isn't really affected by that much
of what happens on the cosmos Hub you
know that's just another chain that nomc
talks to but none of those decisions
directly affect nomic like the atom
token and its inflation none of that
really affects nomic at all and I think
that's the way it should be like all
these chains are sovereign and they can
make their own decisions however they
want whether that's simple token voting
or however but going into the future we
do want uh to be able to propose some
different types of governance mechanisms
so in the ethereum ecosystem there's
been a lot of talk about cool things
like futarchy uh and like we think
that's a really cool governance
mechanism where instead of just simple
voting which has its own perils you know
it just becomes like it might not
necessarily pick the right things all
the time like it's a nice way to open
things up to let anyone voice you know
what they want to vote but you can have
that and have a system that makes more
principal decisions so few tarkey is
where you have markets make decisions
and you know that's a whole other thread
of things to go down to but like uh you
know we want to really explore how to
make nomic make its own decisions uh you
know make the nomic Dow work in a really
good way that like you know is very cool
so uh yeah we're looking forward to that
kind of thing yeah that's rad um kind of
zooming out and and wrapping up um I
think something that being a builder in
the US and this is very friend of mind
for me as well I'm not sure if I
mentioned this at the beginning of the
Pod or or when we were speaking before
we started recording but I was in DC the
other day to Advocate on behalf of
sensible crypto blockchain legislation
in DC so I'm curious to hear how you
guys view um regulatory uncertainty and
just being a builder in the US how does
that impact kind of the Outlook that you
and your team have on what you're
building does it um coner you does it
limit what you guys want to work on um
does it pose a threat to to the team or
or to the broader infrastructure that n
uh that nomic is building I just kind of
want to hear a little bit of your
insights into that yeah it is a tricky
thing because there's so much
uncertainty like if there were rules and
guidelines we would be very happy to
follow them but that just doesn't exist
and so we're sort of in the dark and uh
overall you know we're just doing the
best we can to like well we aren't nomic
we're just turbo fish we're just
developers and so if our role is just
writing code then you know I would hope
at least that's sort of like a First
Amendment ideal that you know we aren't
in control of this protocol so uh you
know there's this separation there but
overall it we don't know uh how that
works and like how that will be
interpreted in the future and uh yeah so
overall it's just a very unsatisfying
thing to not sure if what we're building
will be uh you know received by the law
the right way and yeah yeah I appreciate
that distinction though that um turbo
fish the company is building this
decentralized or is contributing to this
decentralized network it is not the
decentralized network which is um a
great way to kind of keep perspective on
who's building what and how it's being
built so I guess kind of um if you were
to put on your Visionary glasses is um
where do you see defi uh coming where do
you see defi going in the next handful
of years and um I guess you're very
confident that Bitcoin will unleash
these new opportunities into defi so
what do you think those opportunities uh
could bring the broader defi ecosystem
so I think one of the main things is uh
making all of this easier to use for a
mass audience so there's so many
products and cool ideas and things made
in defi but comparing that to
centralized exchanges those are still
far more popular because you know it's
just easier for people to use and so for
instance in nomic uh there's some
features that try to bridge this Gap so
you can just like nomc has this feature
called interchain deposits where you
just get a deposit address a Bitcoin
deposit address you send Bitcoin to that
and then it shows up wherever the
destination is you know maybe osmo mosis
if you want to like start trading
Bitcoin or lping in a pool or something
like that uh so nomic sort of brings
like centralized style ux and I think uh
you know that's the evolution of defi is
making it as easy as centralized
platform so that people switch from
those to this because you know in for
like the average User it's not any
different than just using coinbase or
binance or whatever I think that's the
next step in to really get it you know
orders of magnitude bigger than it
currently is and um maybe in the short
term what's what's next for for you and
the Turbo fish team um what's on the
radar for for future uh features or
updates with nomic so these things will
just keep coming out as we release them
but uh yeah putting as I mentioned a
little bit before uh putting some focus
on the governance mechanisms within the
nomic protocol and and uh just a lot of
you know efficiency upgrades to the
bridging process and the side chain and
uh just making it much more stable uh
like one thing we've seen uh in the last
few months is ordinals has really made
fees on bitcoin spike a lot which is a
cool problem to have that you know so
many people are so excited about all
using all these things on bitcoin but
that just means you know some people are
priced out where there's like crazy fees
going on and so making nomic adapt to
that and work really well in an
environment where the fees you know
every day might Spike up really high uh
and be able to keep working quickly
during that uh you know is something
we'll we'll be working on but overall
you know just keeping uh things running
smoothly by you know improving every
little bit in the stack awesome and if
people want to keep up to date with you
Matt or Turbo fish or nomic what's the
best way they can do so so you you can
follow me on Twitter at mapam it's m a p
p m and then there's a turbo fish
Twitter it's turbo fish org and there's
noic iio uh but yeah there's also the
Discord and the telegram and uh yeah
there's a pretty Lively gnomic community
and ecosystem there and uh yeah awesome
well I've been a big fan of of nomic for
a long time so I was really excited to
to have you uh hop on the other side of
the mic so thank you so much Matt for
taking the time to chat with us to share
your insights into why you're building
what you're building and um I really
appreciate the time and and really look
forward to seeing what you and the team
keep churning out and and keep building
for us web through users cool yeah thank
you so much for having me this was a fun
conversation absolutely looking forward
to the next one cheers well what did you
think of that conversation I thought it
was super cool to learn more about
unlocking the power of of bitcoin's
massive amount of liquidity by creating
non-custodial bridging Solutions into
other networks and ecosystems to
leverage their dii
protocols I also really enjoyed learning
more about nomix security mechanisms
such as the circuit breaker that stops a
potential malicious action and allows
the nomic leaders and Community to
decide what next steps to take if
something like that does occur and it
was refreshing to hear more about the
turbo fish team's Vision to make defi as
simple as CI to keep up to date with the
smarte economy podcast head over to
smarte economy podcast.com and if you
like the guests that we've had on the
show please consider showing support for
us by rating and reviewing the smart
economy podcast on your favorite
podcasting platform every review and
rating helps us to get this show in
front of more people's eyes and ears
and of course if you're a Neo token
holder please consider voting for Neo
news today as your Council
representative we've proudly been
serving the Neo ecosystem since
2017 and we'll continue to do so by
putting portions of our Council income
directly back into ecosystem growth
initiatives with all that said thank you
so much for taking the time to listen to
the smart economy podcast and we look
forward to catching you next
time
yeah